If you want to know something about
yourself, sit on your bed one night and
say, "What's one thing I'm doing wrong
that I know I'm doing wrong that I could
fix that I would fix?" You meditate on
that, you'll get an answer, and it won't
be one you want, but it'll be the
necessary one. When you're trapped, some
of it's your own inadequacy. What you
can do to begin with is every bloody
thing you possibly can do to put
yourself in the most virtuous and
powerful negotiating position possible.
Wherever I go in [music] the world,
people come up to me and they often have
a pretty rough story to relate. It's an
awful thing because you see even in the
revelation of their triumph, the initial
depth of their despair.
So, I wouldn't change that.
But it's not nothing. It's certainly not
just happiness. It's better than
happiness, but it's almost unbearable.
Quick one. Can you do me a favor if
you're listening to this and hit the
subscribe button, the follow button,
wherever you're listening to this
podcast. Thank you so much. The
conversation
you guys have been waiting for. I say
that because of the thousands and
thousands of messages I've had since I
announced that Jordan Peterson, the man
himself, all the way from Canada, came
here to sit in my kitchen and have a
conversation with me. And what a
conversation it was. One of the most
moving moments in the history of this
podcast takes place in this
conversation. And I think the thing that
people love about Jordan Peterson is his
unrelenting desire to just say what he
believes to be true, not what he
believes to be correct,
not what people want to hear, not what
people will be happy to hear. And it's
because of that, it's because of his
pursuit of truth that he's managed to
change millions and millions and
millions of people's lives. That is
absolutely no understatement.
So without further ado, I'm Steven
Bartlett and this is the Diary of a CEO.
I hope nobody's listening, but if you
are, then please keep this to yourself.
[music]
Jordan, um first I I feel I feel like I
owe you a debt of gratitude and I want
to say thank you for the the impact
you've had on my life. And I I'll point
at the the specific impact you've had on
my life. Um I and you asked me before we
started recording why this podcast had
been successful. One of the reasons is
actually something I've I've gained from
from reading and listening to your work
and that's this real commitment to
trying to be your true self and trying
to be your truth. This podcast wouldn't
be successful and I wouldn't have been
successful in terms of um pursuing
myself had I not understood the the
importance of truth across all facets of
life and in my relationships which is a
real pivotal thing for me. And that's
thanks to changed in your relationships
as a consequence of that.
So, um
I I believe it's really difficult to
truly connect some with someone if
you're not speaking and being your
truth. And I I wasn't. I was I I think I
was wearing a mask in my relationships
in a context if I didn't express how I
was thinking and feeling. I was trying
to be who I thought my partner wanted me
to be. And at the point when I like I
let down the mask and I started speaking
my truth
unex actually as I was departing from
the relationship the relationship got
stronger than ever before. And it was
like we were never actually connected
until I was being true with her with my
feelings with what I wanted with my
life. And since then I I would
categorize my relationship as being the
strongest thing I've ever seen in terms
of a a romantic connection with someone.
And so when you were starting to talk in
your relationship in a more truthful
manner, what did that mean that you had
to admit? I mean, you just said that
part of it was a disconnect between who
you were trying to be and who you really
were. So that's a persona issue, right?
So you think maybe
and everyone has this proclivity to some
degree is they're deeply um
self-conscious and uncertain. And so
instead of allowing the person they're
with to connect with that underlying
uncertainty and inadequacy, they act out
a persona. Yeah. And then the problem is
is that well perhaps the person falls in
love with that persona.
But there's no real connection there.
It's it's an artifice. And you know
having said that one of the things that
Carl Jung the great psychotherapist said
about a persona is don't be thinking
that you're better off if you never
formed one. So for Jung it was a voyage
from say undifferentiated self in
infancy and so forth through persona to
authenticity because you have to act out
your ideals to some degree, right? And
and and you also have to formulate a
avatar of yourself in some sense that's
a mediator between you and other people
in casual social encounters. It's like
you don't want to walk into the bank and
have the teller tell you about his or
her day when you say, "How are you
doing?" Right? I mean, now and then that
can happen, but generally it's too much
intimacy too quickly. And so, you need
this this functional shell, but the
problem arises when
that functional shell is all that there
is. And then the real person underneath
is just desperate and and unhappy
because nothing of what's being acted
out reflects a true underlying reality.
What is the consequence the long-term
consequence of acting? So many people,
especially because of the world I live
in in Instagram, in social media, we we
kind of build out these personas and
then we almost follow the implicit
instructions that come with those
personas. Well, that's the problem right
there is that well that that I'm trying
to get a hold of the Disney people at
the moment because I want to do a
lecture series on Pinocchio because I
think Pinocchio is brilliant work of
art. Um, and
if you're a puppet and an actor and
Pinocchio is both at times in that movie
both a puppet and an actor. So why an
actor? Like why is there why is there
something wrong with being an actor?
Well, the first question is, well, who
sets your role?
And then the second question is, who's
pulling your strings? So, you've put on
this front that is there to make you
popular and sexy and desirable and to
mask from yourself your own
inadequacies, but that's a role. Well,
who wrote it and for what purpose? And
so, Jung said, for example, that we all
acted out a myth, whether we knew it or
not. And you know, maybe you're acting
out a tragedy. May maybe you're acting
out narcissis.
You don't know because you've put that
you've put that on yourself in an
attempt in some ways to deliver to
people what they want or more accurately
to look as though you're delivering to
people what they want. And it's not
nothing to do that, right? Because at
least you're attempting in some sense to
adapt to the social world. Someone who's
really infantile and dependent, someone
who's never left home, part of their
problem is that they haven't crafted a
persona.
So you don't want to denigrate it
entirely, but it's no substitute for the
real thing. And it turns out that not
only is what we want from each other the
real thing, but that's also the
adventure of your life. And so if you
aren't truthful, and that means
unfortunately, especially at the
beginning when you start to be truthful,
it means deeply coming to terms with
your inadequacies in humility. So it's
very painful. Without that you don't
have the adventure of your life. You
have the role that has been that you've
acquiesced to and that'll take all the
meaning out of your life. The adventure
of your life. You say imagine who you
could be and then aim single-mindedly at
that. Um, I encounter these young people
who appear to know who they could be or
they they've imagined who they could be,
but for whatever reason, they seem to
choose the certain misery of their
current situation, the job that's
sucking their soul out or that
relationship um over the uncertainty
they'll encounter as they go on the
adventure of their life. So, what would
I say to these young people who always
say to me, Steve, I I want to do this,
but you can see them stifled by fear
because it's like,
yeah, well, it's like, make a plan, man.
So when I was doing my clinical work,
which I I did a lot of career work with
my clients, both at a beginner level, I
would say, like really a beginner level
with people who had no employment
whatsoever, no history of employment,
who are undereducated, and who lacked
every skill you could possibly imagine.
These are people who were really in dire
straits up to people who were operating
at the top of their profession, but who
could still strategize forward. And so
for example, let's say you're at a dead
end in your job. Okay? So I don't find
my work meaningful. All right? So that's
a problem statement. It's like, well,
why not? I find the work I do repetitive
and boring and without spirit. I have a
bad relationship or a neutral
relationship with my boss who doesn't
know who I am. Um, I have problems with
co-workers. All of that needs to be
differentiated, right, and analyzed in
detail. So we might say for example,
let's say you believe that you're
undervalued at work and maybe you are.
What you need to do is you have
something to say and we would have to
figure out what it is that you have to
say. But it would be some variant of I'm
bringing more value to the table than I
am being compensated for. And that's
demoralizing me. And it's also not good
for you, you being my boss. Because if
I'm actually more valuable than is being
recognized, then the fact that you're
not valuing me properly means that I
will become demoralized. I won't work
properly and you won't get the best out
of me. So, it's bad for both of us. And
if your boss is in principle not
amendable to such a discussion, then
what you should seriously consider doing
is finding another job. Okay? So, let's
say we're going to set you up for this.
Okay? This isn't like next week's
enterprise, man. This is your life. So,
the first thing I would ask is, well, do
you have your resume or CV in order?
Well, I haven't typed it up for three
years. Well, what do you think about
bringing it up? Well, I'm pretty nervous
about that because there's some holes in
it and, you know, I didn't do so well in
college and I'm kind of embarrassed
about my resume. It's like, okay, bring
it in. Let's go through it. Let's let's
let's at least update it. Let's look
where the holes are. Let's look at where
the inadequacies are as far as you're
concerned. Right? This isn't my
judgment. It's your judgment. Let's walk
through those judgments and see if
they're warranted because maybe you're
just too guilty and ashamed and
self-conscious and anxious and you're
not you're looking at your resume more
critically than someone else would. And
maybe there's some holes that you need
to rectify. You know, you're you're at
you you were two courses away from your
BA and you dropped out or something like
that. Well, maybe we need six months to
address that. And at least even if you
can't be fully educated, you could be
taking some courses online. And so when
you went to a new job interview and they
said, "What about this hole?" You'd say,
"Well, I I came to terms with that 6
months ago and in an effort to rectify
it, I'm taking the following courses and
here's my plan for completion." That's a
really good answer. And anyone with any
sense who's interviewing will accept
that as an indication that although
you're not perfect and who is that you
have a good plan and that you've thought
it through. Like that's the kind of
answer that in all likelihood will
cement your candidacy for the position.
Okay. So now you're going to go to your
boss. Well, you have to have your CV and
your resume in order, and you have to be
able to stand on it solidly, and which
at least means that you're prepared to
address the inadequacies in a credible,
realistic, believable, and truthful
manner. All right? Now, what you do is
apply for like 10 jobs. You don't have
to take them, but maybe you have to go
to an interview or two or three or four.
And maybe there's a bunch of
opportunities out there for you that you
didn't even know about.
and maybe someone offers you a job. And
so now now you can go to your boss and
say,
"Here's the situation I'm in here at
work. Um, here's my evaluation of the
problems in relationship to me. Here's
what I could do for you if you gave me a
40% raise and the opportunity to
progress, but I'd like to see a plan for
that." And um, I've been looking for
other opportunities before conducting
this discussion. and I have some.
Well, then if your boss treats you with
contempt at that point and doesn't
listen, then perhaps he or she is a
little more narcissistic than might be
optimal and it's time to find a new job.
But this isn't something you do
trivially. And so when you're doubtful,
say you're trapped, you ask yourself,
well,
why am I trapped? And that's a hard
question, right? Because some of it's
your own inadequacy. a lot of it and all
of the part of it that you can deal with
is your own inadequacy.
So even if it's unfair, you know, even
if you're hemmed in for any number of
reasons, inappropriate
like ethnically predicated oppression,
let's say, or maybe you live you're in a
a workplace that really is sexist in
some fundamental sense. Well, that's not
good. It's not just. It's not fair. It's
it's not meritorious. all of those
things, then maybe you shouldn't be
there. But what you can do to begin with
is every bloody thing you possibly can
do to put yourself in the most virtuous
and powerful negotiating position
possible. And you have to think like a
snake in some sense to do that. You got
to get the details right. You have to be
prepared to bite and and you have to
have your eyes on the prize, so to
speak. And people aren't taught this
sort of thing ever really. They're not
taught how to negotiate. They're not
taught how to goal set. They're not
taught how to conceptualize appropriate
success in some broad sense. In some
sense, that's what the humanities are
supposed to teach people. So,
on that point of understanding my
inadequacies or someone's inadequacies,
I I really believe um that it's really
difficult to undergo self-development if
you don't have self-awareness. And I was
I was really trying to understand from
your writings how someone is to build
their self-awareness. It's almost like
the unknown unknown. If you don't have
it, how do you build the thing?
Well, I know a good exercise for that.
It's like a prayer in some sense. In
fact, I would say it's proper prayer. If
you want to know something about
yourself, sit on your bed one night and
say to yourself, you got to mean this.
Like, you got to be desperate. This is
no game this. It's like, my life is not
everything I want it to be, and perhaps
it's not everything that I need it to
be. And by need I mean my life is so
unbearable that the suffering that's
attendant upon that is make me
nihilistic, cynical, bitter, resentful,
homicidal, genocidal, in unable to have
a good relationship, pro prone to punish
people for their virtues because of my
jealousy. Uh driving the proclivity to
see evil everywhere except within my own
heart. Like these are problems, man.
And you ask yourself, you sit on the bed
and say, "Okay, man. I'm ready to learn
something like what what's one thing I'm
doing wrong that I know I'm doing wrong
that I could fix that I would fix?" It's
like you meditate on that, you'll get an
answer. And it won't be one you want,
but it'll be the necessary one. You
know, and it's often something that will
point you to small things. So Carl Jung
said, "People in the modern world don't
see God because they don't look low
enough." And so imagine you're in your
messy bedroom,
you know, and you're sitting on the edge
of the bed trying to have a honest
dialogue with yourself and the little
voice says, "You know, it's pretty
disgusting in here." And you think,
well, I'm way above such trivial
nicities as organizing my room. It's
like, well, that's pride. That's
arrogance. If you're above
organizing what's actually yours, how in
the world are you ever going to organize
anything else? And so, you get on your
knees and you think, well, it's time to,
you know, take a brush to the toilet.
And maybe that's where you start. And
so, and that works like that works. You
start making those micro improvements,
like real micro improvements, real on
the ground actual micro improvements to
things you know that are wrong, you'll
improve unbelievably rapidly.
What you're talking about there sounds
to me a lot like um an over dose of
arrogance and also the need for
humility. Do you think the western world
suffers from arrogance because of our
our relative um privilege and luxury
that we kind of overlook?
Of course. Well, that's a temptation,
right? I mean, when the when the left
radical lefty types go after people for
their unearned privilege, they have a
point. Now, the point is the
existentialists called it throness,
which is another that's a Haidagarian
term. And throness is the fact that we
kind of experience life as if we're
tossed into it. Thrown into it. You
know, you're you're male and not female.
You're you're Hindu and not Christian.
You're tall and not short. You have an
arbitrary range of talents and an
arbitrary range of limitations. None of
which in some sense you chose. It's the
cards you're dealt. Now, some of those
are cards of privilege. Now, maybe
you're born intelligent. Maybe you're
born symmetrical. Maybe you're born
healthy. Um maybe you're born into a
culture where it's much easier not to be
absolutely deprived. Maybe your parents
are rich. And so all of that in some
sense is unearned. Now along with that
comes a good dose of existential guilt
because at the same time and this is
true for anyone regardless of their
cultural background. The ground we walk
on is soaked in the blood of historical
atrocity.
And so that's on you because you know
people think well who's the Nazi? Well
it's the fascist or it's the or who's
the radical communist? It's the radical
left-wing ideologue. And the fundamental
truth of the matter is that's best dealt
with as a spiritual matter is the
adversary is within really most
profoundly. And so you have to take the
responsibility for that historical
atrocity onto yourself. I was talking to
Guy Richie this week about his movie
King Arthur. It's quite an interesting
movie in many ways. And when Arthur, who
could be the hero, takes the sword, he's
so overcome by visions of his murderous
uncle that he can't pick up the weapon.
Well, think about that. Now, you have
weapons at your disposal,
but they've been used by your murderous
uncle. How dare you wield them? And the
answer is maybe it's easy just to leave
the sword on the ground because you do
want to be responsible for atrocities
going forward. And don't think you
couldn't be and don't think you might
not enjoy it.
And so
the way you pay for your privilege is
with your virtue. I mean that most
particularly. You have these
opportunities and this existential
guilt. And the way you expedate that and
atone is by doing your best to live the
best possible life you can manage. To
speak the truth, to treat people with
respect, to abide by the principles of
the dignity of the individual, and to
put your house in order. And that's how
you pay for your unearned privilege. All
of us. And we all have our privileges
and our and our curses. You know, all of
us have that. That's why it's not useful
to be envious of people. You know, you
see some you're a young man. You see
someone drive by in a Ferrari with a
blonde and you think, "My god, he's got
everything." And you know, the woman in
the car is a prostitute who's got a
cocaine addiction and her her life is
just one catastrophe after another and
he's had to lie and cheat his way into
this position and he's afraid that
everything's going to come crashing down
on him. And that's what you're jealous
of. And it's just not that
profound. You don't want someone else's
fate, man. Your fate's enough and your
adventure is enough. It's plenty. It's
more than you can ever fully realize.
And so, that's also part of the reason
that we all believe that the individual
has some intrinsic dignity. It's don't
be so sure that your position and your
room is so damn trivial. It might be
your attitude towards it that's trivial.
And if you're in dire straits and dire
circumstances, just look at how much
opportunity you have to make things
better.
So not that it's easy. I you don't even
want it to be easy,
you know. So
on that point of you don't want it to be
easy. I really contended with this idea
of struggle and chaos in my life and the
role it plays. And once upon a time I
thought I was trying to rid my life of
chaos and struggle. I thought that's why
I was trying to get rich and get the
Ferrari and the blonde. I thought that
would create a life um free of free of
struggle. But then I looked at some
studies and I sort heard about this
thing called gold medal depression when
Olympians come back from the Olympics
and they've lost orientation and then
the day when someone offered to buy my
company for a eight nine no nine figure
number and it filled me with this
emptiness and this dread and I and I and
I tried to understand the role that
struggle would would would have to play
for me to be a fulfilled human being for
the rest of my life.
Yeah. Well, that the observation with
regard to your company that's a that's a
great observation. I mean, we're built
to walk uphill. And when you reach the
pinnacle of the hill, you want to stop
and appreciate the vision. But the next
thing you want is a higher hill in the
distance because it's the uphill climb
that it's it's from the uphill climb
that we derive our value. And I mean
this technically. So almost all the
positive emotion we feel, especially the
the the the emotion that fills us with
enthusiasm, and that's to be filled with
the spirit of God. by the way because
that's what enthusiasm means. That's
experienced in relationship to a goal.
And so in some sense, and this is part
of the religious enterprise, you want a
goal that you can never attain, right?
So you can always move closer to the
goal that recedes as you move towards
it. You think, well, that's frustrating.
It's like sisphus pushing the rock
uphill. But it's not because as you
pursue that goal, you put yourself
together and your life does get better
and richer and more abundant. That's why
the highest levels of virtue and goal
are in some sense transcendent. You want
them to be above everything you're doing
so you can continually move towards
something that's more sublime and
better. That's what you are. You're
you're here to live, not to not to
sleep. And the problem with the vision
of my ties on the beach is that well
first of all that's an envision that's a
vision of of druginduced
unconsciousness. Second it's only going
to work for about a week. Third you're
going to be a laughingstock in a month
and depressed and aimless and and
goalless. It's no that's not it's it's
you want a horizon of ever expanding
possibility. And so it does happen to
people is they because they've staked
their soul on the attainment of an
instrumental goal and it it can be a
pretty high order goal. It was in your
case. But then you think, well, I've now
I'm there. Now what? Well, the answer
can't be, well, I'm going to live in the
lap of luxury and never have to leave a
What do you want to be? A giant infant
with a gold with a gold bottle. You
never have to do anything but lay in
your back and suck. It's like, well, you
see the problem with that as a as a as a
conceptualization. It's no, you want to
be like an active warrior moving uphill
with your sword in hand. And that's
that's dynamic. That's exciting. And
that's why so many young men disappear
into video games. It's that's all acted
out in the video game. So, they have to
act that out in their own life. Not that
I despise video games, cuz I don't, but
they're not a substitute for life. they
might be good training under some
conditions for life. So,
one of the things I was also really
really keen to ask you was about the the
the what's happened in the world over
the last two years. One of the shifts
we've seen in the business world is this
move to remote working. And I hate it
and I hate it for a variety of reasons
because I feel like there's very few
institutions in in our in my life where
I have a chance to meaningfully connect
with with people. Dating has become
screens. socializing has become screens
and the office the institution of the
office in my life was one of the places
especially as a younger man where I got
to meet pretty much 90% of my current
best friends and also partners and and I
really worry about um sitting behind a
zoom uh doing my work um for for the for
the next 10 years. What is your take on
remote working?
Well,
I like it and I don't like it. I I think
it's very difficult for us to understand
our embodied environments well enough to
duplicate them in a healthy and
comprehensive manner in the virtual
world because we just don't understand
what it is that we're doing when we
actually do things rather than represent
them. So for example, I've thought a lot
about online university. Okay. So then
you could imagine
well you can certainly imagine online
lecture courses
uh and you could say well the fact that
they can be delivered on a large scale
very inexpensively is a virtue. You can
bring the knowledge to a very large
number of people at a low cost. So why
not do that? And so that's half the
university. And then you could say well
imagine that you generated the system of
universal tests which is possibility and
that means you could bring accreditation
to everyone at a low cost as well and
that's that the university is online but
that presumes that you know what the
university is and you don't because well
here's some other things the university
is
an excuse for young a credible excuse
that socially sanctioned for young
people who have not yet established a
career career goal to adopt an identity
of upward striving for four years away
from their parents while they meet a new
group of friends. Like that might be 90%
of the university for all we know
because it's certainly the for me for
example when I went to college I I left
home when I was 17 and I left a small
this small town I had grown up in and in
many ways I left the peers that I had
been associating with. Now a couple of
them came to college with me. So I had a
tow hold there. But I made an entirely
different group of friends and they were
friends whose goals were quite radically
different from the friends that I let's
say in some sense left behind. Well,
the reformulation of my peer network
might have been the most important part
of of the first part of my education.
Now I was fortunate at this place. It
was called Grand Prairie College. I had
seven professors.
seven, which is really good, who really
loved to teach. And so I also learned a
lot in the formal sense. But while I was
doing that, I was also negotiating,
well, how much partying do you actually
do? Because zero isn't the right amount.
But every goddamn night till 3:00 in the
morning isn't the right amount either
because you have to balance that in some
sense with practicality and upward
striving. And so and and how do I live
with other people? My roommates. So, I
had one roommate who's a really good
friend of mine still and he walked a
thousand miles with me this year when I
was ill, literally. So, um I really
liked living with him because he was
tough guy. Worked in lead smelters and
he was a cowboy and he was a tough guy.
Four years older than me, about three
years older than me. come back to school
after bouncing around through these like
tough working-class occupations. And he
had his feet on the ground in lots of
ways. And I really liked him as a
roommate because I'd buy some groceries
and then he'd buy some groceries or I'd
make dinner and he'd make breakfast. And
none of that was ever explicitly
negotiated. He was just very aware of
this reciprocal. It's reciprocal
altruism technically. He was very good
at we were both good at tracking our
mutual obligations and fulfilling them.
So we had a very peaceful relationship.
I lived with him for a year and and then
a little bit in different at different
times and in different places. And I I
learned to live with a whole variety of
roommates. I had many roommates. Uh we
had a kind of a frat house in the first
college I went to. And I think anywhere
from 6 to 20 people lived there
depending on the week. You know, it was
really it was ridiculous. It was way too
much fun. And that was also a problem.
But when I look back on that time in my
life, I certainly can't reduce the
educational experience to virtual
classes and virtual tests. That's maybe
that's 10% of it. And we don't know how
to replicate those environments that are
so formative, especially in in their
everydayness, you know, because you live
with your roommates. That's a 24-hour
thing. And so the problem with
virtualization is that we don't
understand our environments well enough
to be certain that we're not excluding
something vital when we concentrate only
on what we think conceptually is
important. Now, I meet with my son
pretty regularly for a project we're
working on, which is an app that will
teach people to write while they write
and use it. So, we're quite excited
about this. But I meet with him
virtually once a week. And it's actually
very efficient. He's on the screen. We
can see our project in front of us. We
can do mutual editing of some of the of
the uh underlying material, educational
material. There's a real place for it.
And I have a cottage up north in Toronto
where we've set up a studio like your
studio here, although ours isn't quite
as impressive. But I can have a
interview and discussion with anyone
anywhere in the world, even in a foreign
language. And that's like unbelievably
remarkable. But but
that doesn't mean that we know how to
virtualize reality or that we should
flee into it, right? And these new
technologies, they're unbelievably
radical and they're very hard to master.
And so we all have to be careful and try
to keep our feet on the ground to some
degree when we're using them. So for
example, now I've really only figured
this out in the last 3 months. I get up
and I I do a series of o exercises that
my wife taught me that are based in the
Kundalini yoga tradition. That's real
helpful. flexibility and breathing
exercises that reduces my anxiety during
the day. I would say about 25%.
And then I try to reserve some time
either for writing or I'm working on a
number of artistic projects. And so I'm
going to do one or or those for a couple
hours in the morning and then maybe a
walk or something with my wife and
breakfast. I have breakfast during all
this. And then I can turn to the sort of
connected world, email and the podcasts
and so forth. And so there's this
balance between privacy, introverted
privacy, let's say, and disconnect from
everyone except for my wife and then uh
contemplated reconnection with the
virtual world. That seems to be working
out pretty well. And you want to get a
balance of that. It's actually, to use a
terrible cliche, sustainable, right? So,
you want to hit your projects hard, but
you have to leave in that not with
entertainment, but with culture because
those are not the same thing. Um,
entertainment is an approximation to
culture. And you need to leave in that
with culture. That's beauty and drama
and art and all of that. and then with
intimate relationships and friendships
and well it's very difficult to get the
balance of all that correct and it's
very difficult to do that virtually so
but I certainly wouldn't forgo the
technology and neither would the rest of
us like people complain about their
phones but they carry them with them
everywhere they go and I'm not cynical
about that the phone it's not a phone
only knows what it is but it's
definitely not a phone and So, it's not
surprising that since it just appeared
and it's so insanely powerful that we
don't know what to do with it and that
might even wreck everything. Like, God
only knows. Twitter itself could bring
civilization to a halt. We we don't know
how to manage the unintended
consequences of our technological
prowess.
And that's exactly it. That's it's the
we we invent technology often, it seems,
for efficiency or to increase
productivity. And it's almost impossible
because of that ignorance to what the um
the unintended consequences might be to
predict them ahead of time. So we we
optimize
essential doctrine of conservative
political philosophy, right? Is beware
of unintended consequences. It's like oh
no, this thing will just do what I want
it to do and nothing else. It's like
no, even Markx knew that wasn't true.
Marks Markx developed a concept the
concept of alienation. you know, we get
alienated from uh the products of our
effort. That's part of the reason he
didn't like factories. Uh and and fair
enough, you know, because factory work,
which is repetitive, in some sense
destroys our artisanal relationship with
what we produce. Now, the problem with
Marx's analysis is that, yeah, but it's
pretty damn efficient and it lifts
people out of absolute poverty really
quickly. So but that doesn't mean that
and existential philosophers aftermarks
developed the concept of alienation to
quite a high degree and technology does
alienate us because of its artificiality
and its and its its coldness and its
mechanistic nature all of that and well
we have to contend with that wisely and
then you ask well how do you contend
with things wisely and I would say well
don't pollute your thoughts with deceit
you compromise your own wisdom
How are you going to make intelligent
not intelligent decisions, wise
decisions? That's why you shouldn't lie.
It's like you're warping the mechanism
that orients you in the world. Do you
really want to do that? This is a brutal
world, man. And I've seen this in my
clinical practice. People whose houses
are built on foundations of sand and the
wind starts to blow and the floods start
to rise and they are in such trouble.
Such trouble. If you're lucky and
something terrible comes your way and
you're reasonably honest and your
relationships are in good order, maybe
you won't end up in hell. And and I mean
hell, I don't mean death. There's lots
of situations you can get yourself in
where death would be far preferable to
what you're going through. So you you
need to be afraid of that. It's like
don't lie. I in my clinical practice in
20 years working with every sort of
person you could imagine, I never ever
saw anyone get away with anything even
once.
So
yeah, we're all subject not least to the
judgment of our own conscience. Try to
escape from that.
No one can escape from that.
Over the last two years, the world has
gone through this this pandemic. For a
lot of people, this is the first time um
for a certain generation, this is the
first time they've experienced such
unpredictable tectonic um uh
destabilization in their lives. Like we
I didn't even believe society was
something that could close. I didn't
believe the tech there was I didn't even
know there was tectonic plates under my
business that could shut down my
business. Right. And also in your over
the last two years you've undergone some
really you know I don't even know what
the right adjective is to use to to
tectonic is not bad.
We'll go with tectonic then. Um tectonic
you know unfortunate um challenges I'll
say in your life but also you know with
your family. What are the lessons we
learn from the the pandemic and from
that type of tectonic suffering about
what actually matters in our lives?
Well, we'll see with regard to the
pandemic because
although in some sense it is in some
ways over, our reaction to it is by no
means over. And part of the reason that
we overreacted, I would say so
precipitously to it is that we were
unprepared for such things in our
naivity and then we rushed to imitate a
totalitarian society in the immediate
aftermath of the pandemic emergence. And
that's something that everybody should
think about a lot. And we're not done
with all that totalitarian nonsense yet.
A lot of that's driven by well fear and
naivity. I mean 50% of Democrats in the
United States believe you have a 50%
chance of being hospitalized with COVID.
And 25% of Republicans believe the same
thing. And you can point a finger at
people and laugh at their ignorance, but
you should really ask, well, why is this
overestimate
of that magnitude? And what does that
mean in relationship to policy? And I've
had conversations with people advising
at the highest level of government in
particularly in Canada who've told me
flat out and they're very reliable
sources that none of the COVID policy
for the last year was driven by reliance
on science. It's all opinion poll. And
that's really pernitious because well
who's asking the questions and how do
they set up the answer and who's
answering and in what emotional state
and so to what degree are we led by
considerations of short-term
propitiation of unwarranted fear? Well,
that's no way for free people to live.
It certainly won't work in the long run.
We're already seeing tremendous supply
chain disruptions and likely the
emergence of an inflationary pressure
that we haven't experienced since the
1970s in the afterm aftermath of the oil
shocks and none of that has sorted
itself out yet. I believe that we will
conclude that our response to the
pandemic caused more death and misery
than the pandemic itself and we have no
endgame in sight. Another thing I asked
the people that I was speaking with,
it's like, when is this over? Well, we
don't know. Well, what would over look
like? Well, we don't really know. And
now what you see is this insistence on
about a monthly basis that a new and
radically different variant has emerged.
And this virus, viruses mutate all the
time, but this virus particularly
mutates. And there are small mutations
and medium-sized mutations, numbers,
let's say. and also effect and and
larger scale mutations. When is that a
variant? Well, how about whenever it's
convenient for the pharmaceutical
companies? You think, well, that's
cynical. It's is it now? The biggest
lawsuits in the history of the American
judicial system have been levied against
the largest pharmaceutical companies on
a regular basis for the last 20 years.
And since when have has it been a
proposition of the political left that
pharmaceutical companies necessarily
have our best interests in mind? Now I'm
not particularly cynical about
pharmaceutical companies. I think they
have a hard job both in terms of
research and development and marketing
and sales and they're going to do what
they can to market and sell. But that
doesn't mean that they are now to be the
arbiters of all public policy because
our politicians are too cowardly and
incompetent to do anything but devolve
their responsibilities to so-called
experts, domain experts. Politics is not
public health. That's medicine.
Politics is the art of analyzing the
entire situation and charting a course
forward all things considered. And for
politicians to trot out the experts and
say follow the science just means that
they've abdicated their own
responsibilities. And I think it's
appalling. I mean, I'm not convinced
that the evidence that masks work is
scientifically credible. It's certainly
at least doubtful. And that's just
masks. I read a paper the other day
suggesting that to prevent the
transmission of one case of COVID, you
have to lock down a thousand people.
Like, how is that justifiable?
especially given that the mortality rate
of COVID is actually quite low unless
you have a pre-existent health problem
particularly obesity and although old
age also qualifies as it does for most
uh diseases but not all
and with regards to let's say the issue
of child vaccination it's like children
have an unbelievably tiny chance of
dying from COVID I don't think there's
any scientific justification for
immunizing children under 12 now at
least it's debated able and I'm not a
domain expert although I'm a decent
scientist and I know how to read the
research material and so
well we'll see what we have to learn
from these tectonic shifts underneath
and you know you might ask yourself well
was that a tectonic shift in dire
physical necessity because the co virus
was genuinely so dangerous or was it an
indication tectonically of our absolute
inadequacy in the face of even a
moderate existential challenge
And maybe it's a little column A and a
little column B, you know. So
I have to ask the question, if if we
were to make your Jordan Peterson the
president of the world and these were
your decisions to make, do you know what
you would have done um
differently or in response to this virus
emerging in Wuhan?
I would say, well, thank you for the
offer, but I declined the position. And
the reason I would say that is because I
think the right solution to the most
serious problems is to be found at the
level of the individual.
So I don't think if I wanted to pursue
what I regarded as the ultimate goal, I
the ultimate goal for me is the
encouragement of the individual and
that's not a that's not essentially a
political enterprise. It's essentially a
theological enterprise and politics has
to be subordinate to that. And so I've
debated throughout the entire course of
my life whether I would adopt a
political career. It was my initial
ambition when I was very young 14 I
would say. But when push came to shove
at every decision point in my life if I
had to choose between
working on the encouragement of the
individual and pursuing a or pursuing a
political career. Um, I always chose the
the former and that's happened every
time the decision has come up. I have
been approached by people in Canada to
involve myself more deeply in a
practical role um, and also publicly as
a political figure, but I'd rather do
what I'm doing. I'm in contact with
people working politically all the time,
both on the
people in the middle, people on the
right, people on the left. I'm agnostic
about that because I know full well that
conservatives have something to say and
left-leaning liberals have something to
say. That's basically predicated to some
degree on their temperament. So,
conservatives tend to be more
conscientious. So that's orderly and
industrious, dutiful, patriotic, uh
willing to make and keep verbal
contracts, reliable, capable of
implementation at the level of detail.
That's kind of conservative virtues
there. But they tend to be lower in
creativity, openness to experience. They
don't think as divergently and their
conscientiousness tends to constrain
their creativity. Whereas the liberal
types, they're high in openness to
experience. That's the creativity
dimension. But they tend to be lower in
conscientiousness, particularly
orderliness. And so what that means is
those with a liberal temperament tend to
be creative/ entrepreneurs and those
with a conservative temperament tend to
be managerial and administrative. That
doesn't mean they can't run businesses.
Well, you want a conservative person to
run your business. You might want a more
liberal person to pepper you with
off-the-wall ideas, you know, and then
if you're going to run an enterprise,
business or a society, there has to be a
continual dialogue between people of
different temperaments so that we can
keep the ship of state, let's say,
tracking to an ever moving destination.
That's why free speech is so necessary.
It's not another right. It's the right.
So because none of us know what's going
on in the final analysis cuz the future
is different than the past really. We
have to talk about what to do all the
time because even if we made wise
decisions in the past that doesn't mean
that we can mindlessly replicate those
decisions right now in the present to
deal with a changing future. So I want
to help encourage people to become the
sort of people who can engage in that
free dialogue. And I think that's the
best way forward especially as we all
become more technologically powerful.
It's like you better be smart enough to
use your iPhone.
And that's pretty damn smart. Let's say
wise because that's no trivial gadget.
And if you're not careful with it, it
will turn on you.
will build authoritarian
presumptions into our artificial
intelligence systems, for example, and
then look the hell out. So, if you're
going to have a hydrogen bomb, you
better be wise enough to wield it.
On that point of the encouragement of
the individual, we all have people in
our lives that we want to encourage.
We hope.
Yeah, we hope. Right. and um we
sometimes fall foul of trying to force
our own bias, our own intention for them
on them. What is the best way if I've
got a friend in my life or you know
partner that I want to encourage to
come out of their place of despair into
a better place, how do I effectively do
that without overpowering them or
stifling them or making them feel
inadequate, which is sometimes the
consequence of trying to change someone
you love?
Well,
example's good,
but then I would say disabuse yourself
of the notion that you know what is best
for this person. You don't not only do
you not know, you actually don't want
that responsibility for two reasons.
Let's say they do what you say and
something good happens to them. Well,
whose victory is that? Yours or theirs?
And if it's yours, did you just steal
it? And then let's say they fail
following your advice. Well, they pay
the price for that and you can skip away
merrily and say, "Well, I should have
spoke more carefully." It's like, you
don't mess about with people's destiny.
You do not know where they're headed.
Now, having said that, you do what
you're doing in this interview, in this
podcast. You ask people questions, real
questions, you know, like, "How are you
feeling?
I'm not doing so good today." Well, you
know what's up? What's going on? And you
can't think, well, I'm going to ask
questions to lead this person in a
particular direction because that's the
same game, the same instrumental game.
You have to see what it is that you want
to know. I see this when people ask me
questions after my lectures, you know,
now and then or during a Q&A. Now and
then people get up and they'll ask a
real question. It's part of the ongoing
dialogue. Something struck them. They
stand up. there's something they really
want to know. It's honest question and
that goes real well, but not
infrequently. Someone stands up with a
little prepared speech that's packaged
as a question. So, I get this from
Christian traditionalists fairly
frequently. They get up and they ask me
about my religious convictions, but
really what they want to do is corner me
into admitting that I should accept
Jesus Christ as my savior and and join a
particular, let's say, uh um
denomination. It's not a question.
It's just a manipulation.
And so your questions, like your
statements, your question should be
honest. And if you ask people questions
and you really listen, they will
untangle themselves. And that's partly
why people love to be attended to. You
know, like
if I meet people on the street, you
know, I ask them their name. They're all
usually flustered when they come up to
me. they don't really want to interrupt
me and then they're flustered and the
first thing I do is shake their hand and
ask them their name and I listen you
know not that good at remembering names
but I listen to it and and they know how
to say their name and so it kind of
settles them down and then it sort of
marks them out as a person against the
background e and then if I pay attention
to them and listen they will tell me
something in like 10 seconds that I need
to know because they are they have
something to say you know and then if
you Listen, people tell you what they
have to say and then you get wise
because you collect all that and so you
want to help someone.
Well, first of all, you decide that
you're aiming towards help, right? And
and that you do that in the spirit of
ignorance. This is what every good
clinician learns is I don't know where
you're headed. I don't know what's wrong
with you. This is a hard problem, man.
It's like what's your problem? I don't
know what your problem is. So, let's
find that out first and then let's find
out one thing you can ask people. This
is actually useful in an argument with
someone you love. They're they're upset
with you.
What are your preconditions for
satisfaction?
Now, I wouldn't state it like that. It's
like, if I could give you what you
wanted right now in the context of this
argument and I wasn't doing it in a
manipulative way, what is it that I
would have to say or do that would in
principle satisfy you? And that's a hard
question. you know, and the person might
say, "Well, I think you should apologize
and about this and you know, and then I
will say,"What words should I use?" And
they'll say, "Well, if you loved me,
you'd know." And I would say, "No, I'm
stupid and ignorant, and I don't know
what the right words are to satisfy you.
So, why don't you give me a hand with
that?" And I'll utter them inelegantly
and awkwardly in a good faith
demonstration of my commitment to peace.
and that won't be so good because maybe
it would have been better if I came up
with it myself, but maybe next time I
can do slightly better.
And that works. It it requires the
person who's after you to think through
the question even of whether there's
anything that could be said or done that
would satisfy them. And if the answer to
that is no, well, probably the
relationship is over. But certainly
the person that they're accusing has
been put in an absolutely impossible
position. But usually, almost
inevitably,
if the person meditates on it for a bit,
there is something that would satisfy
them that can be negotiated as long as
they're willing to give you the
opportunity to do it, you know, stupidly
and badly. So listening man,
Jimmy Carr, I talked to Jimmy Carr two
weeks ago, the famous comedian. Yeah, it
was real interesting. Um, he said comedy
is the most dialogical of of the
entertainment forms. And I thought,
well, what do you mean by that? Because
you're just it's a monologue, right?
Now, I do monologues, but I pay
attention to the audience, right? I'm
always talking to individual people in
the audience and watching their
reactions and listening to the audience
as a whole. So even though it's a
lecture, let's say, or a talk,
I'm watching the audience and
responding. So we're in a kind of dance.
Well, Carr pointed out that comedians
before they hit the road, and this is
virtually in invariably the case, they
have their new routines. So, their their
their corpus of potentially funny jokes
and then they do 200 shows in front of
small audiences and the audience either
laughs or doesn't. And if you're
listening, you collect all the jokes
that people laugh at. If you do that 200
times, you have nothing but hilarious
material. But you listened and then you
can go out on the road. And that was
very interesting to me because humor is
a mysterious
phenomenon experientially and
conceptually. And it's sort of
precognitive and instinctual, but it's
also extremely sophisticated. Then
there's an element of transcendence
about it, right? Because you can laugh
at yourself. And that's in some sense
the highest form of humor. And so it's
so interesting that we can criticize and
elevate ourselves at the same time and
that we find that intensely pleasurable.
And so a good comedian collects ways to
do that, shares them with the audience
and he's listening. And so if you want
to help someone, the best way to help
someone is not to give them advice, but
to listen to them. So
I had a guest actually come on this
podcast before Jimmy Car. Jimmy Carr was
on two weeks ago and we had a great
conversation about um happiness and the
nature of happiness and the guest before
Jimmy Carr wrote in my diary which is a
tradition we have now where all the
guests that come on write a question for
the next guest. So there is a question
in there for you. But the guest wrote a
question um which changed his life which
is um are you happy? And I from reading
your work and understanding your
position on happiness and it not being
the thing to aim for which really struck
me because I thought you know the
[clears throat] I thought life was the
northstar of our lives was to try and be
happy. I guess my question is
what I was going to ask you that
question
aim to be good and pray for happiness.
So the question I was going to is pretty
much that is what is a better question
for me to ask you if I'm checking in on
you? Because we ask that question with
good intentions. Are you [clears throat]
happy? What's a better question for me
to ask Jordan Peterson?
How are you doing?
brilliantly and terribly.
[snorts]
That's,
you know, when you listen to a profound
piece of music,
one that sort of spans the whole
emotional experience,
it's not happy. Happy is elevator music.
And probably you just shouldn't listen
to that at all, right? And and you
think, why? Well,
it's harmless. It's trickly. It's sweet.
Uh simple. It lacks depth. It's shallow.
That's a problem. Um
it doesn't have that deep sense of awe
and horror. I would say that is
characteristic of the best of all music.
You know, you listen to some mis simple
music so-called Hank Williams is a good
example. you know, the blues cowboy from
the 50s who died of alcoholism when he
was 27 and whose voice sounds like an
80-year-old man. Simple melody, you
know, but
there's nothing simple in the song and
and in the voice. It's deep, you know.
It's like the blues. It's it's like
black blues in the States from the 20s.
And this was certainly influenced by
that tradition.
There's this
admission of a deep suffering at the
same time as you get the
beautiful transcendence of the music
and that's meaning you know that's awful
in the most fundamental sense. But you
need an antidote to suffering and it has
to be deep and know deep moves you
tectonically and it's not a trivial
thing and but that's better than
happiness
and maybe if you're lucky while you're
pursuing that and while you're immersed
in it you get to be happy and and you
should fall on your knees and be
grateful for that when it happens. You
know it's a gift. It really is a gift
and it comes upon you unexpectedly your
happiness, you know, but
you aim to climb uphill to the highest
peak you can possibly envision and
that's that's better than happiness.
Why did you include terribly?
Well, for example, now when I go
wherever I go in the world, people come
up to me and they're usually
I wouldn't say they're happy to see me.
They're often in tears, you know, and
they often have a pretty rough story to
relate. You know, they were suicidal or
nihilistic or homicidal or
trapped,
desperate,
you know, and they tell me that real
fast and then they say, "I've overcome
that to a large degree and thank you for
that." And and you think, "Well, that's
really something to have that happen
over and over." In some ways, you might
think, well, how could anything better
possibly happen to you than to have
people come up to you all over the
world, strangers, and open themselves up
like that, like their old friends so
quickly? But at the same time, it's an
awful thing because you see, even in the
revelation of their triumph, the initial
depth of their despair.
So, I wouldn't change that.
But it's not nothing. And it's certainly
not just happiness.
It's better than happiness, but it's
almost unbearable.
God tears again.
[gasps]
[laughter]
It's been quite a two weeks in the UK.
It's been amazing.
It's been amazing. Such a great country,
this country. Such a profound place. And
was so wonderful to see Cambridge and
Oxford and to be welcomed by the
students. And
I saw the cues around the block and the
the reaction you got. I watched the talk
in Cambridge and um it was so wonderful
to see because it, you know, I know that
you don't do what you do for credit that
kind of seems to be, you know, the
antithesis of the pursuing your truth
and doing it for the in the cause of
truth, but um it was so wonderful to see
someone that I know has had such a
profound impact on so many be received
in such a way. We have a closing
tradition. Um, one of the, you know, I
don't normally do this, but one of the
the really great CEOs in our country,
young guys, built a multi-billion dollar
company, really great guy, sat here
yesterday, and I actually told him for
the first time who he was writing the
question for. And I couldn't believe his
face. Oh my god, that's the one person I
want to have dinner with. This is
probably the most successful young
person in our country. And he was and so
he knew who he was writing the question
for. So the question that the previous
guest wrote is for you is
why do you do what you do?
to see what will happen.
Some programs you you cannot predict,
right? You cannot predict how they're
going to end. You have to run them.
Well, you know, I believe that truth
will save the world. I believe that. So
you speak truthfully
and you watch what happens and you take
your consequences,
you know, and maybe you hope and have
some faith that in the final analysis
things will work out in your favor. But
perhaps they will and perhaps they
won't. But that's faith. E that's faith.
It's faith isn't believing in things you
regard as ridiculous.
Sacrificing your intellect. It's a
decision, you know. Will truth, beauty,
and love save the world. Well, you can
find out.
Thank you doesn't seem to quite cut it
for the impact you've had even on me and
also for giving me your time. I know you
understand the tremendous value of time.
I've I've seen it so much in your work.
So, I'm going to say thank you, but I'm
also going to make a commitment to do
something which I think is more
important, which is just to be truthful.
And I think with the platform I have the
years I have ahead of me. Maybe that's
the greatest good that I can do to the
world. So because you've come here,
that's a pledge and a commitment I want
to make to you as my highest form of
thanks that I can give in a karmic way.
Hopefully that will make the world a
better place for for everybody.
Well, at least it will help
ensure that you won't make the world
worse place.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Everything. Thank you. [laughter]
Much appreciated. Thank you, Jonah.
Thank you so much. [music]
[music]
Heat. Heat.
[singing]
[music]